Introduction

---*------Purpose------*-----

Information relating to customer frequency, interest and product popularity is essential to many grocery store owners. This information, known as analytics, can be useful to store owners as they make strategic marketing decisions, but first data must be collected in an efficient and understandable manner. Issues that must be address are usually along the lines of how many people come and go every day, whether or not they buy anything, and which products are sold at different times of year. 

Much of this data can be gathered by observing the areas of high and low traffic in the store, and correlating that information with product locations throughout the store and to the objects which have been purchased. Without gathering and synthesizing this data, stores face the possibility of becoming stagnant over time instead of maximizing consumer satisfaction and business opportunities. 

In addition to knowing traffic patterns, store owners also value a well-stocked and orderly appearance which enhances a customer's shopping experience. To satisfy this condition, grocery store owners will often ask their employees to face or block shelves. Facing a shelf involves moving all products on the shelf towards the shelf face and arranging them in a neat and orderly fashion. This allows the customers to easily see all available products and allows them to reach them without trouble as well. Therefore, keeping shelves faced is also important for grocery stores who wish to maintain their image.

The purpose of this literature review is to not only understand the perspectives of store managers, but also to study the current models which are being created to address the same problem.  After considering the views of the store managers and the benefits of maintaining faced shelves and of understanding the pedestrian flow, we will apply our knowledge of hardware and software, and our general engineering skills to attempt to facilitate and model the behaviour of a customer in a store. The information gathered by our smart shelf design will enable store managers, even those who are high up in the company structure, to understand the desires of their customers and ultimately adjust their store layout and marketing tactics however they like to maximize customer satisfaction.


-----*-----Background---*-------
The issues stated in the above section have been addressed before, by many different parties and in many different ways. All of them sit within the field known as the Internet of Things. The Internet of Things is defined as a relationship between tangible objects and their virtual counterparts, achieved by equipping objects with sensors. This provides them with the ability to communicate with the web without human interaction. 

*Standardizing IoT*

While there is a broad spectrum of IoT applications (many of which are proprietary), to a user, each thing must be controlled by its respective application individually. This will eventually become cumbersome as the number of thing one might use increases. There are two very general ways to approaching this problem: one way is to create standards which are widely accepted and can be considered as IoT protocol, and the other way is to create many different libraries which accommodate for the diverse number of applications (written in various languages, each with their own API, etc.). This second approach has been adopted by an open source community called OpenRemote, which is designed to work with a variety of existing sensors already on the market. The idea is that users can design their own interface and integrate whichever sensors they want, regardless of that sensor's own protocol. Currently, OpenRemote support protocols from more than 25 different applications, such as PhilipsHue, FreeBox and Samsung Smart TV. [OpenRemote]


*existing shelves

When considering the problems stated previously, our team began by researching existing products that address the same issues we are trying to solve. Due to the requirements of our project scope and the limitations in budget and knowledge that comes with being students, our final product will certainly be designed differently from the existing products studied below. Nevertheless, they provided insight and guidance in laying out the concept side of our design if not the hardware and software side of it. 

One of the concepts researched by our team was a shelf that is heavily reliant on an RFID sensor, as discussed by the RFID Arena Smart Shelf article. [Ref1RFID] Since this field of Internet of Things is so modern, there are hardly any academic articles/journals written on this topic as of yet. The article referenced above is an online document written by Sini Syrjala for the RFID Arena website, which seems to be considered an important source for RFID information in the modern playing field, and equivalent in this sense to an academic document had this subject been allowed more time to mature.

The RFID Arena Smart Shelf article discussed the ability of a shelf, when equipped with RFID sensors, to provide information to the store owners about the products which are placed on it. By scanning the product, the shelf is able to identify when an item is picked up or put down. In this manner it may also track an item through the store by recording which shelf it is placed upon. The RFID scan also provides data such as the expiry date, which the shelf can store and set up a notification if the product has not been bought before that date. 

Most interestingly, by tracking the item around the shelves, the owners may also track the item to the cashier. This way they can even gauge customer interest in a product by noting if, after it is picked up, it is put back onto the self or scanned through the check out. Finally, and perhaps most simplistically is the ability of the shelf to automatically alert the employees of a shelf that is empty.
 
RFID, or radio frequency identification, is a form of automatic identification that falls under the same category as barcode scanning and voice recognition. RFID is a general term for systems that use radio waves to automatically identify objects. The most common method involves storing a serial number on a microchip which can then transmit this number to an automatic reader via an antenna. The reader can then convert the radio waves into digital information.[ref3] In this way, the reader is able to gather information that is unique to each separate item that has been tagged. 

RFID has been in use since the 1970s [ref4], but it has not been widely used until recently due to its high cost. Tags are now cheaper to produce, but an application such as ours would require a tag on every item that was to be placed on the shelf. Some companies may be able to fund this, such as in the application mentioned above (RFID Arena Smart Shelf), and in return have access to interesting, product specific information, but as students we do not have the means for such a large scale operation.

Furthermore, unlike our design, this item it does not concern itself with facing of the shelves and it does not have an open source website component. However it could easily provide data relating to customer density and flow, although not entirely accurately, by tracking the RFID tagged items among the shelves.

Another existing smart shelf is the NeWave Sensor. [Ref2NeWave] This item is also created to be used mainly by store owners, however it does not focus on the improvement of customer satisfaction, but rather on security and monitoring of items. The technology involves an antenna that can detect change within a certain area, and in this way it is able to indirectly track the items placed within that area / on the shelf. Since it relies only on a sensory antenna, it can not tag items like the RFID can. It's functions allow data to be collected on merchandise availability, which may indicate high or low stock or even an emergency.

These features may prove useful in certain environments, such as warehouses, but for case it would not be very useful. It would be difficult for the NeWave smart shelf to specify the position of the items on the shelf, preventing an efficient way to determine whether or not the shelf is faced, and this aspect of the design is important for customer satisfaction. As for customer traffic and flow, the only useable data from this the NeWave shelf would be how quickly items are removed from the shelf by the customers. We believe our application offers a better alternative to this problem, as it can directly observe the flow of traffic.


*Supermarket Aisle Management*

Our decision to gather information on shelf facing and pedestrian flow stems from several studies that relate these aspects to items being purchased and therefore to the general success of the store. Research compiled by Larson [AisleManagement] has shown that focusing on aisle management can be beneficial for improving a store's success. When products are grouped into different zones (aisles), these aisles can be monitored and analyzed in order to try to maximize the traffic in and profits from each of the zones. It was also found that if a greater number of people observed a certain product display, traffic increased in the aisle which had that product. Aisle length also has an impact, as it has been noted that consumers are less likely to go down an aisle that is too short or too long. While there are a number of principles which can be followed (for example, grouping products by type is more effective than grouping them alphabetically by their name) [AisleManagement], stores may also find that some situations or trends are specific to the demographics and organization characteristic of their own store. 

Further research, conducted by P. Chandon, J. W. Hutchinson, E. T. Bradlow, and S. H. Young in 2009, used eye tracking technology to measure attention towards items on supermarket shelves. The technology measured eye movements such as fixations and jumps. In complex settings, such as a supermarket shelf, eye fixations represent object identification, and the movement is a good indicator of the direction that the eye is looking. This study suggests that not all shelf locations attract equal attention, and that the items located near the center of two shelf displays were noted more often [ ref 5 ]. It is inferred from this that an increase in shelf space, or an increased number of facings, draws more attention. The report concludes that the effects of increasing the facing of the display area directly and positively impacts the profit made by the store, making it an important aspect for all store owners to consider.
